 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
C
O
URRENT
PINION Corneal neurotization
Mona Koaik and Kashif Baig
Purpose of review
Neurotrophic keratopathy is a devastating corneal condition that can lead to ocular morbidity and blindness.
Current medical and surgical treatments poorly tackle the essential problem of corneal aesthesia and hence
fail to provide a permanent cure. Recent advances in corneal neurotization techniques have shown promise to
restore corneal nerves in neurotrophic keratopathy. This article aims at reviewing the current surgical
advances, along with the current thoughts and evidence available for corneal nerve regeneration.
Recent findings
Corneal neurotization was first introduced in 2009 by Terzis et al., but recently picked up more interest
since 2014. Direct and indirect neurotization are being developed, and different nerves (sural nerve, great
auricular nerve) have been explored for interposition between frontal nerve branches and the cornea.
New endoscopic techniques are introduced for less invasive approaches. On the corneal front, confocal
microscopy and esthesiometry studies have established that the regeneration of the corneal nerves is
happening 6 months after the procedure.
Summary
Neurotization is a budding revolutionary technique that shows promise of cure for neurotrophic corneas,
but at this stage, it is still reasonably invasive and still reserved for selected patients.
Keywords
corneal aesthesia, corneal neurotization, neurotrophic keratopathy
INTRODUCTION
Normal corneal sensation is essential for corneal
function, it initiates blink reflex in response to heat,
evaporation and/or noxious stimuli; it also stimulates
normal epithelial cell mitosis and migration main￾taining surface integrity [1,2]. Corneal aesthesia is a
devastating condition as it diminishes the blink
reflex, causes a decrease in lacrimal gland secretion,
and induces loss of the trophic elements supplied by
the nerves to maintain appropriate epithelial cell
regeneration [1–5]. The denervation leads to neuro￾trophic keratitis and the corneal surface becomes
vulnerable to persistent epithelial defect [4,6].
Basis of corneal innervation
The ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve
(CN V) is responsible for supplying the corneal
sensory fibers [1,2,4]. Almost 1.5% of the fibers
exiting the trigeminal ganglion supply the cornea
making it the most sensitive organ in the body [1].
CN V starts in the brainstem and travels through the
cavernous sinus into the orbit through superior
oblique fissure. It divides into the nasociliary nerves
which carries sensory supply to the ocular surface
via the long ciliary nerves [1–3].
Corneal nerves lose their myelin sheath as they
enter through the limbus into the anterior third of
the stroma where they start grouping into radial
nerve bundles. The nerve fibers then penetrate Bow￾man’s layer and form the sub-basal nerve plexus just
below the epithelium before branching out into
a more superficial network [1,4–6]. The sub-basal
plexus has a mixture of sensory and autonomic
fibers [1,4–6]. The latter are speculated to carry
trophic supply to the epithelial cells, providing a
tight control over epithelial turnover at the limbus
[1,6]. At the molecular levels, the corneal nerves and
the epithelium constantly exchange neuromedia￾tors and trophic factors to maintain surface integrity
[1,4–6].
Cornea, Anterior Segment and Refractive Surgery Department, Univer￾sity of Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Correspondence to Kashif Baig, Cornea, Anterior Segment and Refrac￾tive Surgery Department, University of Ottawa Eye Institute, The Ottawa
Hospital General Campus, 501 Smyth Road Suite W6223, Box 307,
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8L6. Tel: +1 613 746 2244;
fax: +1 613 739 2733; e-mail: baig247@gmail.com
Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2019, 30:292–298
DOI:10.1097/ICU.0000000000000578
www.co-ophthalmology.com Volume 30  Number 4  July 2019
REVIEW
 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
NEUROTROPHIC KERATOPATHY
Neurotrophic keratopathy is a corneal disease occur￾ring when trigeminal innervation is impaired [1–
3,5]. Lack of sensation is pathognomonic and leads
to poor epithelial wound healing, recurrent epithelial
defects, and ultimately corneal melts and perfora￾tions [5,6]. In addition to the loss of sensation, blink￾ing and reflex tear secretions are impaired,
aggravating themechanical damage to the cornea [6].
Cause of neurotrophic keratopathy
Neurotrophic keratopathy is caused by damage to the
trigeminal nerve at any location between its nucleus
and the nerve fibers in the cornea [1,6]. The loss of
sensory supply to the cornea initiates a cascade of
events leading to corneal epithelial damage [1,4,6].
Herpetic eye infections (herpes simplex and herpes
zoster viruses) involving the CN V are the most com￾mon predisposing factors for neurotrophic corneas
today [1,2,5]. Almost a third of patients who have
had an ocular zoster infection tend to have persistent
corneal hypoesthesia at 1 year after the infection [1].
Traumatic injury to CN V and iatrogenic injury (max￾illary fracture repair, tumor resection surgeries, abla￾tive procedures for trigeminal neuralgia) are other
common causes of neurotrophic keratopathy [1,2,5].
Isolated damage to the long ciliary nerves can occur
following ocular surgeries (buckle surgery, corneal
surgeries and panretinal photocoagulation) or result￾ing from ocular burns, and toxic injuries [1–3,5,7].
Exposure keratopathy due to concurrent facial nerve
damage can exacerbate neurotrophic keratopathy and
carries a worse prognosis [1,4,6,8].
Current diagnostic and management options
Treatment options for neurotrophic keratopathy
depend on the clinical staging of the disease as
described by Mackie [9]. In stage 1, the corneal
epithelial changes are mild and are treated with
preservative free artificial tears and ointments,
and by addressing associated ocular surface diseases
[1–3,5,6]. As it progresses to stage 2 with full blown
epithelial defects with corneal swelling and anterior
chamber reaction, treatments include therapeutic
bandage contact lenses, serum tears, amniotic mem￾brane transplant, surgical tarsorrhaphy or chemi￾cally induced upper eyelid ptosis [1–3,6]. In stage
3, surgical options are a necessity to maintain integ￾rity of the globe as the cornea can melt and perfo￾rate, and depending on the visual potential a
Gunderson flap may be an option [1–3,5]. Various
growth factors and neuropeptides (i.e. insulin￾related growth factor 1, Substance P peptide, Cen￾egermin) are being developed to reestablish the
collaborative communication between the nerves
and the corneal epithelium [1,2,5,10].
CORNEAL NEUROTIZATION
Corneal neurotization is a revolutionary surgical
procedure in which a donor nerve graft is coapted
to the damaged nerve. The technique relies on a
transfer of a healthy nerve segment to the corneo￾limbal area, and reestablishing a basis for sub-basal
plexus regeneration and hence reversal of the neuro￾trophic disease [3,8,11]. Corneal reinnervation can
be performed by direct nerve transfers or by nerve
graft interpositions [7,8,12].
Anatomy of the donor nerves
Neurotization techniques most commonly harvest
distal branches of the frontal nerve as donor nerves
(the smaller supratrochlear nerve and the thicker
supraorbital nerve). Both nerves exit the orbit at the
level of the superior orbital rim: the supraorbital
nerve exits at its notch [11,13,14&&], whereas the
supratrochlear nerve exits at 21 mm from midline
between the supraorbital notch (26.5 mm from mid￾line) and the pulley of the superior oblique
[11,13,14&&]. Both nerves tend to exit though foram￾ina in the orbital rim which can hinder their mobi￾lization during nerve transfer surgery [13].
Because the supraorbital nerve divides again as
soon as it comes out of the orbital rim, it can be more
challenging to localize and dissect. But, as it has a
greater density of myelinated nerve fibers near
the orbital rim (almost double the axonal load of
the supratrochlear nerve), it is thought to be a more
robust nerve source for coaptation [13,14&&]. Due to
the dual supply to the forehead, one of these nerves
can be harvested without significant end organ
morbidity [13,14&&].
KEY POINTS

Corneal neurotization is a revolutionary technique that
can offer a potential cure to eyes with
neurotrophic keratopathy.

Corneal sensory recovery is expected at 6 months
after procedure.

Surgery is still extensive needing a
multidisciplinary approach.

Physiological mechanisms of nerve regeneration are still
to be elucidated: direct sprouting versus
neurotrophic stimulus.
Corneal neurotization Koaik and Baig
1040-8738 Copyright  2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved. www.co-ophthalmology.com 293
 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
Direct neurotization
Contralateral nerve transfer
In 2009, Terzis et al. introduced the first neurotiza￾tion procedure to treat unilateral facial nerve palsy
patients. They mobilized the contralateral supratro￾chlear nerve at its proximal end near the orbital rim
and redirected it under the nasal bridge and through
a crease blepharotomy into the conjunctiva (Fig. 1).
The nerve’s endoneurium was opened and the fas￾cicles were separated and sutures in conjunctival
pockets near the limbus [8]. Exposure was obtained
using a bicoronal incision approach [8]. Six adult
patients were treated as part of a staged procedure
to treat facial nerve palsy. Five of the patients
had improved corneal sensation at 6 months post￾operatively using esthesiometry grading [8].
More recently Ting et al. [15] adopted the same
original technique on two patients who had cerebel￾lopontine angle meningioma. Although one of the
patients showed signs of sub-basal plexus formation
at 2 years after the surgery on in-vivo confocalmicros￾copy (IVCM), the other patient ended up with evis￾ceration at 5 years and failure of nerve regeneration
[15]. IVCM did show though an increased density and
prominence of corneal nerves in both eyes that
underwent neurotization compared with neurotro￾phic keratopathy control eyes [15].
Ipsilateral nerve transfer
In 2016, Jacinto et al. operated on a case of unilateral
neurotrophic keratopathy due to ocular surgery
and panretinal photocoagulation and they used
a hemicoronal approach with mobilization of
FIGURE 1. Direct Neurotization technique. The supraorbital (red line) or supratrochlear (green line) nerves are harvested at
the orbital rim through a bi-coronal incision (blue line) and transferred (dotted lines) under the nasal bridge to the contralateral
ocular surface. They are secured under the conjunctiva in pockets using sutures or fibrin glue (9). Same procedure has been
reported to be done with hemi-coronal incision for ipsilateral nerves (8).
Corneal and external disorders
294 www.co-ophthalmology.com Volume 30  Number 4  July 2019
 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
ipsilateral supraorbital nerve. The patient regained
corneal sensation at 6 months when full rehabilita￾tion occurred [7]. Although using ipsilateral nerves
decreases the risks of extensive bicoronal surgeries,
it is only an option to be considered when only
the long ciliary nerves are damaged [7,12]. Any
further retrograde involvement of the trigeminal
nerve in the disease process limits the availability
of the frontal nerve for use. This is especially true
in herpetic causes of neurotrophic keratopathy
[3,16].
Endoscopic contralateral nerve transfer
Leyngold et al. [17,18&&] introduced a new endo￾scopic technique that attempts to transfer the
frontal nerve branches without using a bicoronal
approach, and thus decreasing the surgical and heal￾ing time, and lowering the risk of complications
(alopecia, hematoma). Using smaller surgical inci￾sion to access the contralateral supraorbital nerves,
the surgeons were able to transfer the nerve through
an eyelid crease incision to the perilimbal conjunc￾tiva where the fascicles were separated and secured
[17,18&&]. Although the technique is more challeng￾ing with a steeper learning curve, the outcomes
reported in a herpes zoster patient were favorable
at 3 months after surgery [18&&].
Indirect neurotization
Because direct neurotization is an extensive proce￾dure, interposition nerve grafts have gained more
popularity since 2014 (Fig. 2). Elbaz et al. [19] intro￾duced the use of sural nerve grafts to connect to the
contralateral supratrochlear or supraorbital nerves
to the perilimbal region.
FIGURE 2. Indirect Neurotization technique. The supraorbital (red line) or supratrochlear (green line) are dissected at the
orbital rim through a sub-brow incision (blue line). A graft nerve (yellow line) is coapted to the proximal end of the nerve and
then transferred under the nasal bridge and through another sub-brow incision (blue line) to the contralateral ocular surface. It
is secured within conjunctival.
Corneal neurotization Koaik and Baig
1040-8738 Copyright  2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved. www.co-ophthalmology.com 295
 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
The sural nerve is one of the most easily accessi￾ble sensory nerves for nerve grafting. It usually
innervates the calf and foot area, and its harvest
poses low risk of donor site morbidity
[11,12,19,20&
].
Two sub-brow incision are usually made, and
the contralateral supratrochlear or supraorbital
nerves are dissected and then coapted to the sural
nerve. End-to-end versus end-to-side coaptation is
determined by the surgeon depending on the size
and accessibility of the nerves. The sural nerve
is tunneled under the nose bridge again, and its
fascicles are inserted into perilimbal conjunctival
pockets [11,12,19,20&
].
Initial cases of indirect neurotization described
by Bains et al. [11] and Elbaz et al. [19] involved
mostly pediatric patients with congenital, traumatic
or tumor-related diseases. Weis et al. [12] in 2018
reported the first series of adult patients who under￾went sural nerve coaptation to the contralateral
supraorbital nerve. The pathologies involved
herpetic eye disease, surgical trauma and acoustic
neuromas. The surgery achieved subjective and
objective recovery of corneal sensation at around
6 months after surgery, and only one patient
had recurrence of disease 17 months later, needing
an amniotic membrane transplant to reachieve
stability [12].
New donor nerves
More recently, new reports of use of the great auric￾ular nerve (GAN) as a source of sensory nerve fibers
have emerged [21,22&
]. GAN is a sensory nerve
branch of the cervical plexus, and its injury usually
causes minimal loss of sensation over the parotid
area [21,22&
]. In 2018, Benkhatar et al. reported one
case in which the GAN was harvested and used an
interposition graft. End-to-end anastomosis of the
GAN graft to the ipsilateral supratrochlear nerve was
done through a sub-brow incision [21]. The use of
GAN as a graft is mostly limited to the cases that
allow for ipsilateral nerve transfer because the
length of the GAN (up to 7 mm) to be harvested
can limit its use for contralateral neurotization
[14&&,21].
Jowett et al. reported two cases in which
the ipsilateral GAN was harvested endoscopically
through an infra-auricular incision and a sural nerve
graft was coapted to the GAN and tunneled to the
ocular surface. The nerve fascicles that were sepa￾rated were inserted in to corneo-scleral tunnels cre￾ated [22&
]. Endoscopic GAN harvest limits extensive
facial surgery wounds and as GAN is usually not
affected in most conditions leading to neurotrophic
keratopathy, its ipsilateral use is possible [22&
].
Corneal nerve regeneration
Outcome measures
Primary outcome after reinnervation was objective
and subjective corneal sensation postoperatively.
Most studies have reported a subjective improve￾ment at 6 months after the procedure, while corneal
esthesiometry may lag behind [7,8,11,18&&,19].
Cochet–Bonnet esthesiometry was the method of
choice in older children and adults [8,12]. In chil￾dren less than 2 years of age, esthesiometry was
replaced with surrogate measures of corneal sensa￾tion notably corneal vascularization, ocular surface
healing and decreased fluorescein uptake [23]. Stud￾ies note a period of ocular pain and discomfort after
the procedure that is attributed to the subjective
sensory recovery of the neurotized cornea. This
usually precedes the epithelial healing process
[8,11,19].
Evidence also suggests that only the corneal
nerves regenerate without the normal reflex mech￾anisms involved with the trigeminal nerves. Cata￾pano et al. reported absence of the blink reflex and
minimal effect on lacrimal gland secretion even
after full neurotization occurs [13,24&&].
Reinnervation physiology
It is hypothesized that when axons are disrupted,
Wallerian degeneration initiates a cascade of neuro￾transmitters that allow the proximal nerve ends to
sprout again and rewire into the distal portions
[6,12,24&&]. The nerve graft provides adequate
Schwann cells and endoneurial support to allow
the regeneration process to take place [6,12].
It is known that after corneal transplants and
refractive surgery corneal nerves recover their func￾tion over time [4,25–27]. Restoration of the stromal
and sub-basal plexuses after corneal surgery occurs
in a disorganized pattern that is reported to remain
disordered up to 14 years after surgery [16,25,26,28].
Fung et al. [20&
] and Ting et al. [15] both reported
evidence of disorganized reinnervation at 6 months
after surgery using IVCM. They describe though a
scarce sub-basal plexus in concurrently transplanted
eyes [20&
,27,28].
Catapano et al. created a rat model for neuro￾trophic keratopathy to evaluate the corneal regen￾eration process taking place at 1 month after
neurotization. They report that while there is evi￾dence of recovery of the sub-basal and stromal nerve
layers on IVCM, these nerves are less organized than
their normal control [24&&]. Corneal wound healing
did occur faster in neurotized eyes compared with
the neurotrophic keratopathy eye thus attesting
to the trophic effect of new nerves on epithelial
Corneal and external disorders
296 www.co-ophthalmology.com Volume 30  Number 4  July 2019
